# Lifeline
After two years of COVID caused silence, during the first week of August our choir visited Portsmouth Cathedral to support the daily Choral Evensongs and the Eucharist on Sunday. For this occasion, our choir is extended with singers from other choirs in the Netherlands, Belgium and the UK, and operates under the name of European Cathedral Singers. We were with about 25 members, a bit less than usual before the pandemic, but we were able to sing with great intensity and concentration in a cathedral with splendid acoustics. As our Director of Music Martin van Bleek wrote afterwards, "We made a good sound and impression on the cathedral community".

Portsmouth is a characteristic port, close to Southampton and facing the Isle of Wight. It has a naval harbour which contains some historical warships like the Mary Rose. We (my wife Anne-Carien and I) stayed in the southern part of the city, known as Southsea, with beautiful greens (rather yellow this year), pebble beaches and a pier which looked a bit rusty. To me, it resembled Bognor Regis, the seaside town which formed the decor of the famous and (according to me) sublime novel The Fortnight in September (1931) by R.C. Sherriff, which I read last year. A quiet and peaceful atmosphere where we felt very much at home, friendly people strolling around, and, on Sunday, a lively fair of old Volkswagen models.  

Our daily programme starts at 9.30 am with a practice in the Song School. First, some voice exercises ending with the Alleluia Canon by William Boyce. Then, the pieces which have to be sung during the evensongs. Psalms receive extra attention because of the diction and the meaning of the text. It would contribute a lot to our interpretation when we were able to sing the Psalms by heart, but in Dutch we call that a bridge too far. The day continues with practicing, lunch, another practice, tea, a dress rehearsal in the stalls, and, finally, the evensong at 5.45 pm. Quite a day! Not to mention the recovery afterwards in The Dolphin. A demanding week indeed, but, during the week, you notice the gradual improvement in singing together, and in expressing the message.

Thursday is our Dumb Day, we do not sing and have the time to relax a bit. Anne-Carien and I paid a visit to Osborne House on the Isle of Wight, where Victoria and Albert celebrated their holidays, together with their nine children. The House is a beautiful place to visit and a real treat for children, because the former presence of the many young royals inspired the designers of the current exhibition to create various attractions for children.  

Our music list was perhaps a bit less strenuous than we as a choir were used to during previous years. Some pieces we sang during our last week in Ripon (2019) returned on the programme. We had the chance to joyfully sing the responses by Grayston Ives, Cryer and Rose. Wood's Magnificat and Nunc Dimittis in E flat are always a great pleasure to sing, as are the canticles by Brewer, Aston and again Grayston Ives. Not to forget the Mass in E by William Lloyd Weber and the moving Thou Wilt Keep Him in Perfect Peace by Wesley, which was so solemnly sung as introit to the Queen's funeral services at St. Giles Cathedral in Edinburgh.  

We know our Director of Music, Martin van Bleek, as a very energetic and dynamic conductor, sometimes a bit picky and strict, only when it is necessary of course. As stumbling singers, we are used to his snares, fire and brimstone. But this year, no storm and tempest. Instead, Martin was considerate, encouraging, and even patient, of course not too patient. As a consequence, we felt more confident, sometimes even relaxed, of course not too relaxed. As always, we learnt a lot from him and enjoyed this week of singing very much.  

The two organists provided each their own characteristic contribution. Peter Shepherd joined as from Monday till Wednesday. We very much enjoyed his serious, cheerful,  and at times majestic way of playing which really lifted up our hearts. As Peter has joined us now for various years, he is becoming a real friend of the choir.  Jas Hutschinson-Bazely accompanied us from Friday till Sunday. His attentive and serene way of playing put us in the right mood. Jas is also, to our great luck, becoming more and more a regular accompanying organist, particularly here in the Netherlands.  

A week of singing, practicing, meeting and sharing is really a challenge, but a very satisfying one. We already look forward to next year, hopefully with a lot of friends and colleagues, but also with new members willing to share in this great vocal and spiritual experience.
