# Verslag
Every summer, our choir visits one of the beautiful cathedrals in England to replace the local choir during the holiday season. This year we spent one week in Ripon. Since 1969, Ripon is disconnected from England's impeccable railway network. Therefore, after having arrived at Bradford-Leeds Airport, we had to find our way to find a proper means to travel to Ripon. I met with two fellow tenors at Schiphol Airport, Kees and Henk. We were lucky to spot Philip (also a tenor) at Bradford-Leeds Airport. Four tenors fit very elegantly in a taxi. The driver happened to know the road very well, and adapted his speed accordingly. So before we had the chance to start practicing an anthem or psalm, we already arrived at our destination. Ripon is a charming little town or, more appropriately, a city, as its main church is a cathedral. Philip and I stayed at the Unicorn, an old inn at the Marketplace. Downstairs a lively pub, upstairs a very old fashioned  poltergeist next to Philip's room, which deprived him a little bit from his night's rest. On the facade of the former Town Hall, you can still read the text "Except the Lord keep ye cittie ye wakeman waketh in vain"  (Psalm 127). This text refers to the Hornblower (wakeman) who, for hundreds of years, every night at 9pm blows a horn at the center of the Marketplace. Unfortunately, I did not make use of the opportunity to witness this ancient custom, probably because, at that particular moment, I was always recovering from the day's Evensong in one of the local pubs.
			For me, a week of practicing and singing the Choral Evensong (every day except Thursday) and the Eucharist  on Sunday, is like a week of mountain climbing or sailing: you are completely absorbed by an activity which is both exciting and strenuous. As a conductor Martin demands a lot from us. Apart from consonants, proper endings and diction, he wants us to turn our voices into music, which does make sense. After a full day of rehearsal in the sung school, we always practice half an hour in the stalls, right before the Evensong starts. This is a moment full of tension, because the conditions of the sung school and the church are very different. When, during the dress rehearsal, Martin, after several trials, eventually concludes that what we produce is beginning to sound like music, we all feel very satisfied.
			Apart from the Director of Music, the choir is also pushed to higher levels of performance by the organist. James Pollard is a stable and secure rock to lean on. He never fails and has always the right feeling for what is appropriate to play, given the conditions of organ and church, the intentions of the conductor, and the qualities of the choir. James has a busy schedule and usually leaves on Wednesday night, before our day off on Thursday. So, on Friday, we start afresh with a new organist. This year, we were lucky to have Peter Shepard with us. He already accompanied us a couple of times, and even arranged a singing weekend in Florence, Italy, when he stayed there as a student. Peter has two amazing characteristics: he is a brilliant musician, and he sometimes disappears. The latter characteristic makes working with him a bit hazardous, to put it mildly.  This year, all went perfectly well, until, on Saturday afternoon, we were ready to rehearse in the nave, in order to be prepared for the Sunday Eucharist. We were all dressed up and waiting, Martin stood ready to start with the first set of Responses, but no Peter. After a not too polite phone call, it became clear that Peter was still in the sung school trying to find a very beloved pencil he had lost. All is well that ends well. After the Sunday Evensong, Peter's voluntary was a splendid piece by Vierne, which Peter played by heart, and which gave rise to a spontaneous applause by the clergy.
			These impressions hopefully make clear how much I enjoyed this year's visiting choir trip to Ripon. I forget to mention the nice evenings spent with other choir members in pubs and restaurants. Apart from singing, we are also able to talk and share are worries and happiness. As Purcell wrote, music really is the food of love.