# EDUREV-D-23-00346R2
## Aangemaakt 
28 april 2024
## Subtaken
- [x] ms 346R2 1-7 📅 2024-05-15 ✅ 2024-05-21
- [x] ms 346R2 8-15 📅 2024-05-17 ✅ 2024-05-21
- [x] ms 346R2 16-25 📅 2024-05-18 ✅ 2024-05-21
- [x] ms 346R2 punten noteren 📅 2024-05-19 ✅ 2024-05-22
- [x] ms 346R2 commentaar versturen 📅 2024-05-20 ✅ 2024-05-23

## Aantekeningen 
Hoeveel blz: 25
Deadline: 22 mei

### 20-05-2024 
10:25 p 1
10:26 p 2 in 7 min
10:31 p 3 in 5 min
10:37 p 4 in 5 min
10:44 p 5 in 6 min
10:51 p 6 in 7 min
10:55 p 7 in 5 min

### dinsdag 21 mei 2024
09:31 p7
09:39 p8
09:42 p9
09:45 p10
09:52 p11
11:48 p11
11:57 p12
12:00 p14
12:04 p15
12:06 p16
12:36 p18
12:41 p19
12:46 p20
12:47 p21
12:50 p22
12:54 p23
12:57 p24
12:59 p25
13:02 p26
13:03 OK, klaar. We zijn er nog niet uit! Op welke dimensies kunnen TC's variëren? Op de goal dimensie, op de membership dimensie, de boundary dimensie? De purpose dimensie: improving practice/prof development/prof learning versus impact student learning -- knowledge production. Dus naar binnen gericht en naar buiten gericht.
Membership: Dimensie is veel vager. Zitten ook weer doelzaken in. 
### woensdag 22 mei 2024
Wat is membership? How teachers are engaged in and with the group and how relationships are built.
Underwood, J., & Kowalczuk-Walędziak, M. (2018). Conceptualising professional communities among teachers. _Polish Journal of Educational Studies_, _71_(1), 123-142.
A possible typology of community membership that could be used to understand differing professional communities could be: (1) factually acknowledged but professionally insignificant communities; (2) communities of which membership provides affirmation; (3) communities the membership of which enables the development of practice; (4) tightly bounded and pre-structured communities, membership of which is not optional but dependent on other factors, such as a workplace; (5) more loosely bounded communities that exist outside the workplace, membership of which may create space for flexibility and creativity. These may of course overlap and interact. However, this may be a useful typology with which to understand the way teachers perceive any given professional community.

OK, dus het gaat in feite om het type activiteiten in de groep. Wat zien we in dit paper: collaboration en sharing

We zijn er uit. Purpose: some TCs focus on the teachers (professional development, improving practice, knowledge production), some TCs focus on the student (impact student learning). Membership: some TCs focus on collaboration, some TCs focus on sharing (knowledge, values, norms). Boundary: some TCs are project-based, other TCs have a longer lifetime (?).

Table 2 wordt dan dus typology oid. 

Nu Table 3. Daar kan ik niet echt veel   meer van maken. Wel dat de hoofdonderscheidingen uit de typologie terugkeren. Je zou die hoofdonderscheidingen voorbeelden kunnen hangen van het interactierepertoire, de omschrijving van het he shared domain en van de group indentity

OK, wat worden mijn punten

1. Goed geluisterd. Meer interpretatie (maar zie onder), onderscheid tussen externally led and bottom-up communities (ok), purely descriptive versus normative (ok)
2. Probleem zit in de poging tot interpretatie. Geen definitie! Teleurstellend. 
3. Een definitie kan mischien niet. Wel een poging tot typologie. Als we Tabel 2 erbij nemen. Zie boven.
4. Tabel 3 blijft dan nog steeds moeilijk. In feite een beschrijving van mogelijke vormen van interactional repertoire. Van shared domains. Van group identities. Er is een conceptuele verbinding mogelijk tussen typologie (Table 2) en kenmerken (Table 3). Purpose en shared domain (docent versus student). Membership en interactional repertoire (collaboration versus sharing). Boundary en Group identity
5. Heatmap niet meer nodig. Vasthouden dan getallen. 

OK, nu uitschrijven.

Manuscript D-23-00346R2 is the result of a serious attempt of the authors to comply with the comments of the reviewers. In my view, the authors' efforts have led to a substantial improvement of the paper. Although I am not fully satisfied with the paper as it stands now, I think the interaction between reviewers and authors has contributed a lot to the value of the current version of the paper. 

Having said that, I now focus on the three comments I made earlier. My second comment about the distinction between externally led and bottom-up communities has been adequately dealt with. The same goes for my third comment about the distinction between a purely descriptive and a normative account. 

My first comment dealt with the interpretation of the various classifications and indicators as reported in Table 2, Table 3 and Figure 3. Although progress has been made I am still not convinced that readers of the paper are really helped with the current presentation of the outcomes. I was triggered by the statement on p. 22: "This systematic review shows the variation in the definitions of teacher community and does not suggest a standard or unified definition that could serve the different study purposes". After the introduction which claimed that "The popularity of communities and their reported impact on teaching and student outcomes demand a clearer understanding" (p. 2), I definitely hoped to find such a clearer understanding in the review. 

I acknowledge that, based on the collected papers, a standard or unified definition is difficult to concoct. However, a more advanced attempt to arrive at a typology of TCs is perhaps possible. My attempt is definitely not the final answer. But the authors might be inspired to give it another try. I focus on Table 2 with the three classifying dimensions purpose, membership and boundary. Under "purpose" we find five examples: "improving practice, professional development, impact student learning, professional learning, knowledge production, and unspecified purpose". Apart from the latter example, the other four could be gouped in two categories: focus on the teacher and focus on the student. 

The next dimension, "membership", is in itself difficult to interpret. It is useful to look at the original definition provided by Underwood and Kowalczuk-Walędziak (2018, p. 133): "A possible typology of community membership that could be used to understand differing professional communities could be: (1) factually acknowledged but professionally insignificant communities; (2) communities of which membership provides affirmation; (3) communities the membership of which enables the development of practice; (4) tightly bounded and pre-structured communities, membership of which is not optional but dependent on other factors, such as a workplace; (5) more loosely bounded communities that exist outside the workplace, membership of which may create space for flexibility and creativity. These may of course overlap and interact. However, this may be a useful typology with which to understand the way teachers perceive any given professional community." In Underwood and Kowalczuk-Walędziak's typology, the concept "membership" apparently refers to the kind of relationship that exists between the individual member of a community and the community itself. This definitely overlaps with the dimension "purpose", even with the dimension "boundary". But if we look at the nine examples of "membership" in Table 2, the distinction between collaboration and sharing hits the eye. So (my interpretation!), some teachers join a community collaborate and other teachers are member of a community to share values, knowledge, teaching practices or norms. 

As far as the dimension "boundary" is concerned, with its examples "coming together, project, collaborative teams and self-organised" I had trouble to find a common denominator. They only common characteristic I could think of is duration: some TCs are ad-ho, transient, communities, other TCs have a longer lifetime. But that may not be a correct interpretation.

Taken these interpretations together, my typology of teacher communities would be: "Teacher communities are transient or more permanent groups of teachers collaborating to produce knowledge or to share experiences, with a focus on the teacher or on the student". I emphasize that this is not the typology the authors should arrive at! That is not the intention of my comments. I just want to give an example of what I, as a reader, hope to find in the paper. This may inspire the authors to, once again, go through the data to arrive at a more comprehensive account. 

A final remark on Table 2, Table 3 and the Figure 3. In my view, the references in Table 2 and 3 will not be traced by the reader. Instead, a convincing example, one reference, for each of the qualifiers might help the reader to understand the meaning of the particular characteristic. 

The heatmap in Figure 3 does not mean a lot to me. If it is possible to arrive at a typology like I suggested, I can imagine that the authors link specific subcategories of community indicators to types of TCs. As explained above, there is already  a conceptual link between the "membership" dimension and the community indicator "interactional repertoire". This conceptual link is also displayed in the heatmap. My advise is to take a more descriptive approach. As an example (only an example!): TCs aiming at sharing experiences are characterised  by a focus on dialogue (interactional repertoire) and peer support (group identity). In this way, readers who want to create a particular type of TC have a guideline how to design their community. But if the authors would like to stick to the heatmap, than I would suggest to put numbers in the cells, on top of the colours. 