# D-23-00346R1
Manuscript EDUREV-D-23-00346R1, entitled "Systematic review of the operational definitions and indicators of teacher communities in empirical research" is a revised paper in which many comments by previous reviewers have been seriously addressed. My compliments to the authors! In my view, considerable progress has been made. Having said that, there are still some issues to be dealt with. 
​
1. Although the authors have chosen an appropriate level of abstraction to describe their findings, operational definitions and community indicators, the reported findings in Table 2, Table 3 and Figure 1 suffer from a lack of interpretation. I would definitely welcome an attempt to interpret the reported findings, particularly in Table 3. The authors could adopt an inductive approach to cluster community indicators in a smaller set of overarching categories. In this way, the terms Group Identity, Shared Domain and Interactional Repertoire are filled with meaning on the basis of the reviewed studies. I can imagine that the heatmap presented in Figure 1 becomes more interesting when more meaningful Classifications are used. 
​
Another approach to deepen our understanding of the findings is to add examples of representative studies in the Results section, particularly in par. 4.1.2. where the Community Indicators are described.
​
2. I was puzzled by the finding the authors reported that two types of teacher communities can be distinguished: communities instigated by an external stimulus, e.g. the researchers who collected data in the reviewed studies, and communities which were established by the teachers themselves in a bottom-up way. It is easy to imagine that these two types of communities have different characteristics in terms of boundary, membership and purpose. To such an extent that it does not make sense to treat these two types of communities as similar, as the authors do in the current version of the paper. If these two types of communities can be identified in the collected studies, then it might be interesting to compare the two types in order to make further sense of the data.
​
3. The Discussion and Conclusions sections reveal a certain ambiguity in the paper. On the one hand, the authors have defined as their goal to find out "how the concept of community is operationalised in empirical studies of teachers' communities for professional development" (p. 2). On the other hand, the authors evaluate the quality of the definitions and descriptions they have found. This evaluation is more in line with the goal to find out how *good* the concept of community is operationalised. It is clear that these two goals are not identical.  If we stick to first goal, a lot of statements in the Discussion and Conclusions sections are difficult to understand. E.g., "researchers must define ..." (p. 18), "We argue that clearly defining parameters is essential..." (p. 18), "academic research needs to work towards a clearer articulation..." These normative statements are all in line with the second goal (how good ...). My problem is that the paper is limping on two legs, represented by the two goals explained above. If the authors argue that their collection of definitions leads to the conclusion that "there exists a visible absence of conceptual clarity surrounding the very definition and operationalisation of teacher communities in empirical studies" (p. 21), then the whole endeavour of conducting a review study has to be reconsidered. The field may simply not be mature enough to warrant a systematic review. 
​
1. The paper still contains complex sentences. For instance, in par. 2.3. we find in the first subparagraph sentences like "professional communities emerge because of common ways of doing things which are also what marks a boundary", "competency is determinant of a role/position within that community". The next subparagraph starts with "However". The contradiction with the first subparagraph is unclear. In this subparagraph we read "such as group identity which is those elements that bind teachers together". These examples show that the text of the complete manuscript should be carefully scrutinized to identify sentences to be reformulated. Take also the tables into account. In Table 2, I can imagine that the order of the defining terms in column 2 is determined by their reported frequency in column 3. However, that has not been done in a proper way. The title of the paper has been improved but is still not very concise. It should at least start with "A systematic review...". Then, "the" before "operational" could be omitted. The authors might consider to remove the qualification "in empirical research". With these changes, the title would read "A systematic review of operational definitions and indicators of teacher communities".

To conclude, my advise is to make more sense out of the data, in order to arrive at a better understanding of the way the concept of teacher communities has been further developed in recent research. 